========
Abstract
========

*For the non-nonsensical it may be best to skip to the last section...*

Unlike the plethora of scientific opuses that reveal how the average *Ursidae*
(bear) can balance on a bicycle, little has been garnered about how *Homo
sapiens* is able to accomplish this feat. When the rider's normal locomotion
instruments for continual balance are replaced by two in-line wheels connected
to one another by a manipulatable semi-vertical revolute joint the rider is
then forced to direct his mental energy to observing the additional states of
the bicycle's configuration and the proper actuation of his arms to maintain
vertical equilibrium. It was found that this "simpler" task is well suited for
manual control theoretic dissection and postulation.

I will herein present the findings of the seventh age of my tenure as a
doctoral candidate in the prefecture of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering at
the Davis campus of the University of California. These describe our
experimental procedure which involved strapping the untamed and aggressive
*Homo sapiens* to a velocipede of extraordinary measurement capabilities. We
perturbed the beasts as they tried with all their mental and physical might to
stay upright, constrained as they were. Following more than seven hundred
trials with three hand-picked quality specimens, the clouds of data have shaped
into more than distant blurs. The control and identification tools of Bode,
Evans, and Ljung combined with the modern day data management tools of van
Rossum, Moler, and Torvalds have shed light on the details of the sensory
feedback mechanisms present in the neurological pathways connecting the *Homo
sapien*'s senses to his actuators. To the bear's dismay, this has in turn
revealed that the highly regarded 1899 bicycle model of Whipple is sorely
lacking and that the control theoretic hypothesis of McRuer for the great
aeroplane pilots of yesteryear does, in fact, apply to the human control of a
machine as simply complex as the bicycle.

The dissertation will provide the reader with a glimpse into the reductio
complexio of the physiological system of the greater *Homo sapiens* by forced
travel on the automatic velocipede with highlights of manual control theories,
inertial investigations, data wrangling, and of course demonstrations of the
magical-like auto stability of the bicycle.

*The sensical...*

For those of you who'd rather read a more traditional exit seminar abstract
here is a quick explanation of the above in plain modern Engineering English:

The bicycle, a simple toy to many, turns out to be an excellent platform to
study the intricacies of human-machine interaction and human operator control
for both dynamic and economical reasons. The bicycle is inherently unstable at
low speeds and the human generally actuates the non-minimum phase system, and
thus balances, only by means of rotating the handlebars. This dissertation
describes a multi-year multi-person effort to better understand the dynamics of
the bicycle, the biomechanics of the rider, and the rider's internal control
system through theory and extensive experimentation. The work has revealed a
number of interesting facts including the primary actuators used by the human,
effects of the rider's motion on the bicycle's stability, the inadequacy of the
canonical bicycle model, and the ability of a simple multi-output control
system formulated around the classical crossover model to describe the human's
control efforts. These findings have implications in both single track vehicle
design theory and human-machine interaction theory.
