.. _handling:

========
Handling
========

* Review of handling
* Thoughts on bicycle handling
* Ron's analytical method
* Comparison of different bicycles

Preface
=======

Handling is really what got into this research topic. Sometime in late 2003, I
had made it my goal to design a low racing recumbent bicycle for my senior
design project [#]_. When I was faced with choosing the critical bicycle
geometry: head tube angle, trail, front wheel radii, I came to maybe the first
realization as a young engineer that there wasn't necessarily an equation for
everything. More, specifically that there wasn't a equation waiting for me that
would tell me the geometry for a great handling bicycle. This was an important
revelation helped put me where I am today. So with no clear solution in site, I
scoured books for some kind of answer. I hadn't hit my inner limit at that
point to just do some experiments of my own, so I kept looking. The closest I
could find to the equation I desired was David Gordon Wilson and Frank Whitt's
interpretation [Wilson1982]_ of Jone's classic study on the rideability of
bicycles [Jones1970]_. It turned out that there was this one equation that
related bicycle geometry with rideabilty. When the resulting index was plotted
on Jone's graph alongside other bicycles, you could see how close your bicycle
design was to bicycles that already existed. This was what I was looking for,
somebody had in fact thought of this issue. So without any judgement I used
Jone's equation to plot some upright bicycles that I liked on the graph and
then to solve Jone's equation to get the geometry required for my recumbent
design to handle like my upright bicycles. It ended up that our bicycle was
ridable, as most bicycles are, but whether or not it handled well is certainly
up in the air. This gave me reason to believe that maybe there was more to the
story of handling than Jone's equation.

In a way, for human-machine interactions, handling is somewhat of a holy grail.
It certainly has been for my research, but as most people soon find out, the
holy grail may be impossible to find. Engineers want to develop tools, methods,
guidelines, rules and laws that give the them structure and power to design
machines and systems to operate as they wish. When dealing with a machine that
is controlled by a human, such as airplane, skateboard, ... or bicycle, one's
goal is often to design the machine such that it can easily be manipulated by
the human for the task at hand, and allow them to perform the task well. Some
machines have very specific tasks like a backhoe removing dirt from a hole and
some very more broad tasks, such as an exoskeleton as controlled by Sogorney
Weaver in Aliens 3. The bicycle falls somewhere between those, as you have
general task to get from A to B, without falling over. But sometimes you may be
communting on an empty wide road, racing in a criterium, or dogding cars in the
streets of San Francisco each of these tasks different in its own right. The
most task in bicycling is probably to simply stay up, as most learners know all
too well. But advanced riders such bmx, mountain, trials and (gymnist
bicycling) need the bicycle to perform unbelieavble delicate and fine control
tasks, such as riding along the top of fence [MacCaskill2008]_. The machine
becomes an extension of our body, often allowing us to do things that we can't
with only our bodies.

Some people have thought in depth about handling. In particular in the aircraft
field. From day one, the inventors of airplanes began realize that the planes
must need to be both stable and handalable to successfully get from one point
to the other, without crashing or even dying. But more importantly, that
stability and handalabilty are not necessarily one and the same. It became of
the upmost importance to understand these relatoinships. As the airplane
quickly grew and became more tied to our military actions, research was funded
to figure this out and became clearer that the problem was intrigingly complex.
Some of the first results where clarification of what we mean by handling and
stability. More strict definitions of these terms bloomed. Cooper and Harper
gave an early and now longstanding definition of handling:



1. Can the task at hand be completed within some bound?
2. Can the taks be completed with minimal workload from the human? Both
   physical and mental.

We can often objectively whether or not a task was completed well. There are
wasy to estimate and measure the physical workload and ways to measure the
mental workload. Even with all this taken into account, one must consider the
subjective opinion from the human on whether they both completed the task well
and what the workload level was.

.. rubric:: Footnotes

   _[#] I competed in the 2005 ASME human powered vehicle challenge along with
   a team of Mechanical Engineering students from Old Dominion University.
